We introduced this course by speaking about the
seven bridges of Königsberg problem. The problem
says that in the Königsberg's map at that time, we
had seven bridges as you can see. And the question
is, can we find a path that traverses
each of the seven bridges exactly once?
The answer was that it's impossible, in this
video, we will talk more about this claim.
The title of this lecture is what
is a Eulerian trail/circuit. Yes,
what is a Eulerian trail/circuit? Good question.
In a graph G, sometimes it's possible to have
a trail that passes from all edges exactly
once. And that is called a Eulerian trail,
a Eulerian trail is a trail that passes from each
edge of the graph exactly once. And if the trail
ends at the same vertex where it started, then
it's a cycle, it's called a Eulerian circuit.
A Eulerian circuit is a circuit (trail that starts
and ends at the same vertex) that traverses each
edge exactly once. Note that a graph that contains
a Eulerian circuit is called a Eulerian graph,
and if it contains a Eulerian trail only not
a circuit, it's called a semi-Eulerian graph.
Okay but what is the relation with the seven
bridges of Königsberg problem? Remember that
we could represent this problem with a graph,
lands are vertices, and bridges are edges.
The problem states that we want to find a way to
traverse each of the seven bridges exactly once.
Bridges are edges here, therefore, the question
is: Can we find a way to traverse each edge
exactly once? In brief, can we find a Eulerian
trail in the graph? That's the relationship.
And in the introduction, we answered this
question, we claimed that it's impossible, why?
Sure we could try all possibilities, but the
main reason is that not all graphs have a
Eulerian trail, to be Eulerian or at least
semi-Eulerian, there are conditions that
the graph must respect, which is not the case
for this graph, this is why it's impossible.
But what are these conditions? Let's discover.
Let's start with undirected graphs. For an
undirected graph, to have a Eulerian trail,
two conditions must be respected: all vertices
with non-zero degrees must be connected, and the
number of vertices with an odd degree must be 0
or 2, remaining ones must all have an even degree.
Saying that all vertices with non-zero degrees
must be connected is slightly different from
saying that the graph is connected. Vertices
with non-zero degrees are non-isolated vertices.
Isolated zero degree vertices are tolerated
because even if they're not connected to
other ones, they don't have an edge that we
necessarily have to reach to make a Eulerian
trail, so it's fine. However, if we have
disconnected vertices with non-zero degrees,
you can see that this is a problem,
because we have edges that we cannot reach,
and remember that a Eulerian trail must pass from
every edge exactly once, which is impossible.
Let's see if these conditions are respected by the
seven bridges graph. First condition is respected,
but for the second condition, here are degrees of
vertices. And the number of vertices of odd degree
is 4, neither 2 nor 0. Hence, the condition
is not respected, the graph doesn't have a
Eulerian trail, we cannot traverse each of the
seven bridges exactly once. However, if we add
a bridge like this, the condition becomes
respected, and we can find a Eulerian trail.
What about Eulerian circuit? Same conditions?
The first condition remains the same, but for the
second one, this time all vertices must have an
even degree. Here is an example, all vertices with
non-zero degree are connected, all vertices have
an even degree, we can find a Eulerian circuit.
By the way, when the number of vertices with odd
degree is 2, we can only find a Eulerian trail,
and it necessarily starts from one of those 2
vertices and ends at the other one. So later in
the algorithm, to find where we start our trail,
we search one of the two nodes with odd degrees.
And when all vertices have even degree, we can
find a Eulerian circuit, which is also a Eulerian
trail, and we can start from any vertex we want,
all of them can produce a Eulerian circuit.
And when the number of vertices
with odd degree is neither 0 nor 2,
then we have no Eulerian trail at all,
by consequence no Eulerian circuit.
Let's move to directed graphs. In directed graphs,
we have the out-degree, the number of edges going
out of the vertex, and the in-degree,
the number of edges going in the vertex.
To have a Eulerian trail in a directed
graph, first condition is that, by ignoring
direction of edges, all vertices with non-zero
degrees are connected. And second condition,
we must have at most one vertex with out-degree
- in-degree equal to 1, at most one vertex with
in-degree - out-degree equal to 1, and remaining
vertices must have out-degree equal to in-degree.
Which is the case for this graph.
The first condition is respected,
we have at most one vertex with out-degree
- in-degree = 1, it will be our start point,
we have at most one vertex with in-degree
- out-degree = 1, it will be our end point,
and remaining ones have out-degree =
in-degree, we get this Eulerian trail.
And for Eulerian circuit, first condition
remains the same, and the second condition
is that all vertices must have out-degree =
in-degree. Which is the case for this graph,
and we can start from any vertex, we can
get this Eulerian circuit for example.
Recap, in undirected graph, we have a Eulerian
trail if all vertices with non-zero degree are
connected, and we have 0 or 2 vertices with odd
degree, the trail starts from one of them and
ends in the other. We have a Eulerian circuit if
all vertices with non-zero degree are connected,
and all vertices have even degree, the
circuit starts and ends in any one of them.
And in a directed graph, we have a Eulerian trail
when by ignoring direction of edges, all vertices
with non-zero degree are connected, and we have at
most one vertex with out-degree - in-degree = 1,
it will be the start point, and at most one
vertex with in-degree - out-degree = 1, it will
be the end point, and all remaining vertices have
out-degree = in-degree. And we have a Eulerian
circuit if the same first condition is respected,
and all vertices have out-degree = in-degree,
the circuit starts and ends at any one of
them. For example we have this circuit.
To practice on this, below, you will find
a quiz where you will be shown graphs,
and you will have to determine if they are
Eulerian, semi-Eulerian, or none of them.
And we can find interesting applications for
Eulerian trails and circuits, for example when
visiting a city, we may want to pass from all
roads, but without passing from the same one
twice, here we can think of finding the Eulerian
trail of that place, it will represent the way
we should traverse the city to visit all roads
without having to pass from the same one twice.
We've reached the end of this lecture, I
hope that you now know what is a Eulerian
trail and a Eulerian circuit, and what
are the conditions to find one in a graph.
In the next lecture, we will learn how
to find the trail or circuit itself,
by using the Hierholzer's algorithm,
see you in the next lecture.